Now, Antony, our hopes areanswered.
You said the enemy would notcome down,
but keep the hills and upperregions.
It proves not so.
Their battles are at hand;
they mean to warn us at Philippihere,
answering before we do demand ofthem.
Tut, I am in their bosoms, and Iknow wherefore they do it.
They could be content to visitother places,
and come down with fearfulbravery,
thinking by this face to fastenin our thoughts
that they have courage; but 'tisnot so.
Prepare you, generals.
The enemy comes on in gallantshow;
their bloody sign of battle ishung out,
and something to be doneimmediately.
Octavius, lead your battlesoftly on,
upon the left hand of the evenfield.
Upon the right hand I, keep thouthe left.
Why do you cross me in thisexigent?
I do not cross you, but I willdo so.
They stand, and would haveparley.
Stand fast, Titinius; we mustout and talk.
Mark Antony, shall we give signof battle?
No, Caesar, we will answer ontheir charge.
Make forth, the generals wouldhave some words.
Stir not until the signal.
Words before blows.
Is it so, countrymen?
Not that we love words better,as you do.
Good words are better than badstrokes, Octavius.
In your bad strokes, Brutus, yougive good words.
Witness the hole you made inCaesar's heart,
crying, "Long live. Hail,Caesar."
Antony, the posture of yourblows are yet unknown;
but for your words, they rob theHybla bees,
and leave them honeyless.
Not stingless too.
O, yes, and soundless too, foryou have stol'n their buzzing,
Antony, and very wisely threatbefore you sting.
Villains, you did not so whenyour vile daggers
hack'd one another in the sidesof Caesar.
You show'd your teeth like apes,and fawn'd like hounds,
and bow'd like bondmen, kissingCaesar's feet;
whilst damned Casca, like a cur,
behind struck Caesar on theneck.
O you flatterers!
Flatterers?
Now, Brutus, thank yourself.
This tongue had not offended sotoday,
if Cassius might have ruled.
Come, come, the cause.
If arguing make us sweat,
the proof of it will turn toredder drops.
Look, I draw a sword againstconspirators;
when think you that the swordgoes up again?
Never, till Caesar's three andtwenty wounds be well avenged,
or till another Caesar
have added slaughter to thesword of traitors.
Caesar, thou canst not die bytraitors' hands,
unless thou bring'st them withthee.
So I hope, I was not born to dieon Brutus' sword.
O, if thou wert the noblest ofthy strain, young man,
thou couldst not die morehonorable.
A peevish school boy, worthlessof such honor,
join'd with a masker and areveler.
Old Cassius still.
Come, Antony, away.
Defiance, traitors, hurl we inyour teeth.
If you dare fight today, come tothe field;
if not, when you have stomachs.
Messala.
What says my general?
Messala...
this is my birthday.
At this very day was Cassiusborn.
Give me thy hand, Messala.
Be thou my witness that, againstmy will, as Pompey was,
am I compell'd to set upon onebattle all our liberties.
You know that I held Epicurusstrong, and his opinion.
Now I change my mind, and partlycredit things that do presage.
Coming from Sardis,
upon our former ensign twomighty eagles fell,
and there they perch'd,
gorging and feeding from oursoldiers' hands,
who to Philippi here consortedus.
This morning are they fled awayand gone,
and in their steads do ravens,crows, and kites
fly o'er our heads
and downward look on us, as wewere sickly prey.
Their shadows seem a canopy mostfatal,
under which our army lies, readyto give up the ghost.
Believe not so.
I but believe it partly, for Iam fresh of spirit
and resolved to meet all perilsvery constantly.
Now, most noble Brutus,
the gods today stand friendlythat we may,
lovers in peace, lead on ourdays to age.
But, since the affairs of menrest still incertain,
let's reason with the worst thatmay befall.
If we do lose this battle, thenis this the last time
that you and I will speaktogether?
What are you then determined todo?
Even by the rule of thatphilosophy by which
I did blame Cato for the deathwhich he did give himself--
I know not how, but I do find itcowardly and vile,
for fear of what might fall, soto prevent the time of life--
arming myself with patience tostay the providence
of some high powers that governus below.
Then, if we do lose this battle,
you are contented to be led intriumph
through the streets of Rome?
No, Cassius, no.
Think not, thou noble Roman,
that ever Brutus will go boundto Rome;
he bears too great a mind.
But this same day must end thatwork the ides of March begun.
And whether we shall meet againI know not.
Therefore our everlastingfarewell take.
Forever and forever farewell,Cassius.
If we do meet again, why, weshall smile;
If not, why then this partingwas well made.
Forever and forever farewell,Brutus.
If we do meet again, we'll smileindeed;
if not, 'tis true this partingwas well made.
Why then, lead on.
O, that a man might know
the end of this day's businessere it come.
But it sufficeth that the daywill end,
and then the end is known.
Ride, ride, Messala, ride,
and give these bills unto thelegions on the other side.
Let them set on at once,
for I perceive but cold demeanorin Octavia's wing,
and sudden push gives them theoverthrow.
Ride, ride, Messala!
Let them all come down!
O, look, Titinius, look, thevillains fly.
Myself have to mine own turn'denemy.
This ensign here of mine wasturning back;
I slew the coward, and did takeit from him.
O Cassius, Brutus gave the wordtoo early,
who, having some advantage onOctavius, took it too eagerly.
His soldiers fell to spoil,
whilst we by Antony are allenclosed.
Fly further off, my lord, flyfurther off;
Mark Antony is in your tents, mylord;
Fly, therefore, noble Cassius,fly far off.
This hill is far enough.
Look, look, Titinius:
are those my tents where Iperceive the fire?
They are, my lord.
Titinius, if thou lovest me,
mount thou my horse and hide thyspurs in him,
till he have brought thee up toyonder troops and here again,
that I may rest assured whetheryond troops be friend or enemy.
I will be here again, even witha thought.
Go, Pindarus, get higher on thathill;
my sight was ever thick; regardTitinius,
and tell me what thou notestabout the field.
This day I breathed first: timeis come round,
and where I did begin, thereshall I end;
my life is run his compass.
Sirrah, what news?
O my lord!
What news?
Titinius is enclosed round aboutwith horsemen,
that make to him on the spur;yet he spurs on!
Now they are almost on him!
Now, Titinius!
Now some light.
O, he lights too.
He's ta'en.
And, hark.
They shout for joy.
Come down; behold no more.
O, coward that I am, to live solong,
to see my best friend ta'enbefore my face.
Come hither, Sirrah.
In Parthia did I take theeprisoner,
and then I swore thee, saving ofthy life,
that whatsoever I did bidst theedo,
thou shouldst attempt it.
Come now, keep thine oath;
now be a freeman, and with thisgood sword,
that ran through Caesar'sbowels, search this bosom.
Stand not to answer: here, takethou the hilts;
and when my face is cover'd...
as 'tis now, guide thou thesword.
Caesar...
thou art...
even with the sword that kill'dthee.
So, I am free,
yet would not so have been,durst I have done my will.
O Cassius.
Far from this country Pindarusshall run,
where never Roman shall takenote of him.
It is but change, Titinius,
for Octavius is overthrown bynoble Brutus' power,
as Cassius' legions are byAntony.
Then these tidings would wellcomfort Cassius.
Where did you leave him?
All disconsolate, with Pindarushis bondman, on this hill.
Is not that he that lies uponthe ground?
He lies not like the living.
O my heart.
Is not that he?
No, this was he, Messala, butCassius is no more.
O setting sun, as in thy redrays thou dost sink to night,
so in his red blood doesCassius' day set,
the sun of Rome is set.
Our day is gone; clouds, dews,and dangers come;
our deeds are done.
Mistrust of my success hath donethis deed.
Mistrust of good success hathdone this deed.
O hateful error, melancholy'schild,
why dost thou show to the aptthoughts of men
the things that are not?
O error, soon conceived, thounever comest unto a happy birth,
but kill'st the mother thatengender'd thee.
What, Pindarus!
Where art thou, Pindarus?
Seek him, Titinius, whilst I goto meet the noble Brutus,
thrusting this report into hisears.
I may say "thrusting" it,
for piercing steel and dartsenvenomed
shall be as welcome to the earsof Brutus
as tidings of this sight.
Hie you, Messala.
I will seek for Pindarus thewhile.
Why didst thou send me forth,brave Cassius?
Did I not meet thy friends?
And did not they put on my browthis wreath of victory,
and bid me give it thee?
Didst thou not hear theirshouts?
Alas, thou hast misconstruedeverything.
But, hold thee,
take thou this garland on thybrow;
thy Brutus bid me give it thee,and I will do his bidding.
Brutus, come apace, and see howI regarded Caius Cassius.
By your leave, gods, this is aRoman's part.
Come, Cassius' sword, and findTitinius' heart.
Where, where, Messala, doth hisbody lie?
Lo, yonder, and Titiniusmourning it.
Titinius' face is upward.
He is slain.
O Julius Caesar, thou art mightyyet.
Thy spirit walks abroad,
and turns our swords in our ownproper entrails.
Brave Titinius.
Look whe'er he have not crown'ddead Cassius.
Are yet two Romans living suchas these?
The last of all the Romans, farethee well.
It is impossible that Romeshould ever breed thy fellow.
Friends, I owe more tears tothis dead man
than you shall ever see me pay.
I shall find time, Cassius, Ishall find time.
Come therefore, and to Thasossend his body;
his funerals shall not be in ourcamp, lest it discomfort us.
Lucilius, come, and come, youngCato; let us to the field.
Labio and Flavios, set ourbattles on.
'Tis three o'clock, and Romans,yet ere night
we shall try fortune in a secondfight.
Yet, countrymen, O, yet hold upyour heads!
What bastard doth not?
Who will go with me?
I will proclaim my name aboutthe field.
I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
A foe to tyrants, and mycountry's friend.
I am the son of Marcus Cato!
And I am Brutus!
Marcus Brutus, I!
Brutus, my country's friend;know me for Brutus.
O young and noble Cato, art thoudown?
Why, now thou diest as bravelyas Titinius,
and mayst be honor'd, beingCato's son.
Yield, or thou diest.
Only I yield to die.
There is so much that thou wiltkill me straight:
kill Brutus, and be honor'd inhis death.
We must not.
A noble prisoner.
Room, ho!
Tell Antony, Brutus is ta'en.
I'll tell the news.
Here comes the general.
Brutus is ta'en, Brutus ista'en, my lord.
Where is he?
Safe, Antony, Brutus is safeenough.
I dare assure thee that no enemy
shall ever take alive the nobleBrutus;
the gods defend him from sogreat a shame.
When you do find him, or aliveor dead,
he will be found like Brutus,like himself.
This is not Brutus, friends,
but, I assure you, a prize noless in worth.
Keep this man safe, give him allkindness;
I had rather have such men myfriends than enemies.
Go on, and see whether Brutus bealive or dead,
and bring us word unto Octavius'tent
how everything is chanced.
Come hither, poor remains offriends, rest here.
Statilius show'd the torchlight,but, my lord, he came not back.
He is or ta'en or slain.
Sit thee down, Clitus.
Slaying is the word: it is adeed in fashion.
Hark thee, Clitus.
What, I, my lord?
No, not for all the world.
Peace then, no word.
I'd rather kill myself.
Hark thee, Dardanius.
Shall I do such a deed?
O Dardanius.
O Clitus.
What ill request did Brutus maketo thee?
To kill him, Clitus.
Now is that noble vessel full ofgrief,
that it runs over even at hiseyes.
Come hither, good Volumnius,list a word.
What says my lord?
Why, this, Volumnius: the ghostof Caesar hath appear'd to me
two several times by night;
at Sardis once, and this lastnight here in Philippi fields.
I know my hour is come.
Not so, my lord.
Nay, I am sure it is, Volumnius.
Thou seest the world, Volumnius,how it goes;
our enemies have beat us to thepit;
It is more worthy that we shouldleap in ourselves
than tarry till they push us.
Good Volumnius,
thou know'st that we two went toschool together;
even for that our love of old, Iprithee,
Hold thou my sword-hilts, whilstI run on it.
That's not an office for afriend, my lord.
Fly, my lord, fly, there is notarrying here.
Farewell to you, and you, andyou, Volumnius.
Strato, thou hast been all thiswhile asleep;
farewell to thee too, Strato.
Countrymen, my heart doth joy
that yet in all my life I foundno man but he was true to me.
I shall have glory by thislosing day,
more than Octavius and MarkAntony
by this vile conquest shallattain unto.
So, fare you well at once,
for Brutus' tongue hath almostended his life's history.
Night hangs upon mine eyes,
my bones would rest that havebut labor'd
to attain this hour.
Fly, my lord, fly.
Hence, I will follow.
I prithee, Strato, stay thou bythy lord.
Thou art a fellow of a goodrespect;
thy life hath had some smatch ofhonor in it.
Hold then my sword, and turnaway thy face,
while I do run upon it.
Wilt thou, Strato?
Give me your hand first.
Fare you well, my lord.
Farewell, good Strato.
Caesar, now be still;
I kill'd not thee with half sogood a will.
What man is that?
My master's man.
Strato, where is thy master?
Free from the bondage you arein, Messala:
the conquerors can but make afire of him;
for Brutus only overcamehimself,
and no man else hath honor byhis death.
So Brutus should be found.
I thank thee, Brutus,
that thou hast proved Lucilius'saying true.
All that served Brutus, I willentertain them.
Fellow, wilt thou bestow thytime with me?
Ay, if Messala will prefer me toyou.
Do so, good Messala.
How died my master, Strato?
I held the sword, and he did runon it.
Octavius, then take him tofollow thee
that did the latest service tomy master.
This was the noblest Roman ofthem all.
All the conspirators, save onlyhe,
did that they did in envy ofgreat Caesar;
he only, in a general honestthought and common good to all,
made one of them.
His life was gentle, and theelements so mix'd in him
that Nature might stand up andsay to all the world,
"This was a man."
According to his virtue
let us use him with all respectand rites of burial.
Within my tent his bones tonightshall lie,
most like a soldier, orderedhonorably.
So call the field to rest, andlet's away,
to part the glories of thishappy day.